# Morphology - Adjectives

This section will detail the morphology of adjectives in the language.

Like nouns, adjective inflections take the form of suffixes which do not alter the original word (except potentially the final consonant).  The suffix itself may be stressed if two syllables or more.

## Adjective Uses

Adjectives can be used in 3 main ways:

- Attributively (on a noun or a pronoun)
  - *ħou aħak* - good house
  - *ħourä' u'* - *good you
- Predicatively (as a verb)
  - *aħak ħouqo* - the house being good
  - *aħak quħouqo* - the house not being good
  - *ħouqoñ mu aħak qâ* - my house is good
  - *ħouqoñof mu aħak qâ* - my house becomes good
- Nominalised (as a noun with that attribute)
  - *ħoute* - good thing (Inanimate Nominative)
    - *ħou, ħounôrh, ħouëx, ħouôra* (I-ACC/DAT/GEN/LOC)
  - *ħounjh* - good thing (Animate Nominative)
  - *ħounj* - good person (Human Nominative)
  - *ħougo* - good thing (Divine Nominative)

### Attributive Adjectives

When used attributively, adjectives go in front of the noun and must agree in Number with the noun.  When used on a pronoun, they must also agree in Person.  There is no adjective agreement in Noun Class or in Case.  1st person pronouns do not take specific person agreement endings, thus the 1st person pronoun forms are the same as noun agreement forms.  Note that the 3rd person Divine pronoun is considered to be Plural for the purposes of adjective agreement.

When adjectives take a Number suffix in front of a noun, it can be dropped from the noun; maintaining it serves to emphasise the number or countability.  When an adjective-noun phrase is modified by a quantifier/numeral or plural determiner, they may both drop number suffixes; maintaining a number suffix on either or both words emphasises number/countability following a determiner or quantifier, or indicates an inexact number following a numeral.

- *ħou uttum* - good fisher
- *ħouñënj uttum* - two good fishers
  - *ħouñënj uttuñqënj* - **two** good fishers
  - *quonj ħouñënj uttum/-ñqënj* - two or so two good fishers
- *ghâemqënj ħou uttum* - these two good fishers
  - *ghâemqënj ħouñënj uttum/-ñqënj* - these **two** good fishers
- *ħounox uttum* - good fishers
  - *ħounox uttunox* - good fishers **plural**
- *źü ħou uttum* - six good fishers
  - *źü ħounox uttum/-ndox* - six or so good fishers

Example words are: *ħou* 'good', *ete'* 'new', *uttum* 'netmaker/fisher'

|Agree|Suffix        |Example A         |IPA                 |Example B         |IPA                 |
|-----|--------------|------------------|--------------------|------------------|--------------------|
| N.s | -            | ħou uttum        |/ˈħou̯ ˈuttum/       | ete' uttum       |/ˈɛtɛʔ ˈuttum/      |
| N.d | -ñênj (ë)    | ħouñënj uttum    |/ˈħou̯ɴɤɲ ˈuttum/    | eteñqênj uttum   |/ˈɛtɛɴɢeɲ ˈuttum/   |
| N.p | -njex, -nox  | ħounox uttum     |/ˈħou̯nɔx ˈuttum/    | etencex uttum    |/ˈɛtɛɲ̊cɛx ˈuttum/   |
| 1.s | -            | ħou mvo          |/ˈħou̯ ˈmʋɔ/         | ete' mvo         |/ˈɛtɛʔ ˈmʋɔ/        |
| 1.p | -njex, -nox  | ħounox ghâu      |/ˈħou̯nɔx ˈɣɑʊ̯/      | etencex ghâu     |/ˈɛtɛɲ̊cɛx ˈɣɑʊ̯/     |
| 2.s | -rä'         | ħourä' u'        |/ˈħou̯raʔ ˈuʔ/       | eterrä' u'       |/ˈɛtɛrraʔ ˈuʔ/      |
| 2.d | -räqqënj     | ħouräqqënj ljarh |/ˈħou̯ˌraɢɢɤɲ ˈʎær̥/  | eterräqqënj ljarh|/ˈɛtɛrˌraɢɢeɲ ˈʎær̥/ |
| 2.p | -raccex      | ħouräccex me     |/ˈħou̯ˌraccɛx ˈmɛ/   | eterräccex me    |/ˈɛtɛˌraccɛx ˈmɛ/   |
| 3.s | -(')arh      | ħou'arh qâħ      |/ˈħou̯ʔær̥ ˈɢʌħ/      | ete'arh qâħ      |/ˈɛtɛʔær̥ ˈɢʌħ/      |
| 3.d | -(')arhqênj  |ħou'arhqênj reunj|/ˈħou̯ʔær̥ɢeɲ ˈrøʊ̯ɲ/ | ete'arhqênj reunj|/ˈɛtɛʔær̥ɢeɲ ˈrøʊ̯ɲ/|
| 3.p | -(')arcex    |ħou'arcex ñâenj   |/ˈħou̯ʔær̥cɛx ˈɴɑe̯ɲ/| ete'arcex ñâenj  |/ˈɛtɛɲ̊cɛx ˈɴɑe̯ɲ/   |

### Pronominal Adjectives and Politeness

Because adjectives are required to agree with pronoun person and number, the pronoun itself can easily be dropped.  This is commonly used to replace pronouns in polite (formal and informal) speech with adjectives.  The adjective used can vary with situation, although certain adjectives are particularly commonplace.  The effect achieved is similar to English 'your/his/her ___', as in 'your excellency', 'her majesty'.

Adjectives don't take case suffixes, meaning that this usage is restricted to Nominative and Accusative case usage (with Accusative being marked by a corresponding pronoun suffix in the Tag).  

- Adjectives
  - 1st person
    - *pefśe* 'humble' is common when speaking politely to one's elders
    - *yaśta* 'friendly' is common when speaking politely to one's peers.
  - 2nd and 3rd person
    - *ħou* 'good' and *ħouźo* 'good-natured' are common to address/speak about others in all situations
    - *vae* 'foremost' and *aoa* 'senior' is commonly used for/towards one's elders
    - *yikkiś* 'magnificent' and *arralji'* 'mighty' are commonly used for/towards rulers and gods
  - such 'pronominal adjectives' can also be used to insult, as in *ârrôźyë* 'dull' or *ħâero* 'dirty'
- Politeness examples
  - *uir vâe (u') ħâunju'* - 'you should go there'
    - Polite: *uirâ vâe ħourä' ħâunju'* - lit. 'good (you) should go there'
  - *ienjaś minj (mvo) (tśarh) vâurmotśarh'* - 'I'll bring you over there'
    - Polite to elders: *ienjaś minj pefśe aoarä' vâurmotśarh* - lit. 'humble (I) will bring senior (you) over there'
    - Polite to peers: *ienjaś minj yaśta ħouźorä' vâurmotśarh* - lit. 'friendly (I) will bring good-natured (you) over there'
- Irreverant: *jêñghanjh minj (qâuñ) qâqon* - '(the king) he sees it/over there'
  - Reverent: *jêñghanjh minj yikkiś'arh qâqon* - lit. 'magnificent (him) sees it/over there'

Such polite speech is common among strangers and acquaintances, towards customers/patrons or from people of a lower status to those of a higher one (generation/age, work, etc).

During the reign of the Central Kingdom, case suffixes were allowed to attach to pronominal adjectives, extending to system to replace the entire original pronoun system in polite speech.  This innovation was generally restricted to people within the Kingdom however.

### Predicate Adjectives

Adjectives can be used predicatively by converting them into verbs using the suffix -qo, which derives from the verb qâe (to be / to become).  In this form, they can be used either as participles or as im/perfective verbs in all uses.  Note that this suffix can be used for other parts of speech as well.

Note that there is a distinction between using an adjective and using its predicate participle attributively, i.e. between *ħounox uttum* 'the good fishers' and *quħouqonox uttum* 'the being-good fishers'.  The distinction is similar to the essence-vs-state distinction of Iberian languages - that is, *ħounox uttum* describes fishers who are, by their nature/essence, good, while *quħouqonox uttum* describes fishers who are currently being, or considered right now to be, good.

The construction of all 4 verb stems of the predicate adjective is regular.  Predicate adjectives do not need to agree with a noun when used as a verb, but when a participle is used attributively (uncommon, as explained above), it will take agreement suffixes after the verb suffix.

|Form|English           |Affix   |Example A |IPA         |Example B  |IPA          |
|----|------------------|--------|----------|------------|-----------|-------------|
|PART|being good/new    | -qo    | ħouqo    |/ˈħou̯ɢɔ/    | eteqqo    |/ˈɛtɛɢɢɔ/    |
|NEGP|not being good/new| qu-qo  | quħouqo  |/ɢuˈħou̯ɢɔ/  | queteqqo  |/ɢuˈɛtɛɢɢɔ/  |
|IMPF|is good/new       | -qoñ   | ħouqoñ   |/ˈħou̯ɢɔɴ/   | eteqqoñ   |/ˈɛtɛɢɢɔɴ/   |
|PERF|becomes good/new  | -qoñof | ħouqoñof |/ˈħou̯ɢɔɴɔf/ | eteqqoñof |/ˈɛtɛɢɢɔɴɔf/ |

Examples of use:

- PART: *ljanjin mu, aħak **eteqqo**njêrh, qâ* - 'I like my house being/becoming new'
- PART: *qâeñ hounox uttum **quħouqo**arcex (ñâenj) qârh* - 'the good fishers were not being good (fishers)', lit. 'the good fishers were not-good-being (them)'
- IMPF: _**ħouqoñ** mu aħak qâ_ - 'my house is good'
- PERF: _**ħouqoñof** mu aħak qâ_ - 'my house becoming good'

### Nominalised Adjectives

Adjectives can be used to represent things with that attribute when *nominalised*.  In order to do this, the adjective takes the appropriate noun class ending.

|Class/Case|English           |Affix       |Example A |IPA         |Example B  |IPA          |
|-----     |------------------|------------|----------|------------|-----------|-------------|
| INAN.NOM |good/new thing    | -te/to     | ħouto    |/ˈħou̯tɔ/    | etette    |/ˈɛtɛttɛ/    |
| ANIM.NOM |good/new thing    | -(e/o)njh  | ħounjh   |/ˈħou̯ɲ̊/     | ete'enjh  |/ˈɛtɛʔɛɲ̊/    |
| HUMN.NOM |good/new person   | -(o)nj     | ħounj    |/ˈħou̯ɲ/     | ete'onj   |/ˈɛtɛʔɔɲ/    |
| DIVN.NOM |good/new thing    | -ge/ko/etc | ħougo    |/ˈħou̯gɔ/    | etekke    |/ˈɛtɛkkɛ/    |

These can be used the same as any noun.  They tend to take indefinite meanings, contrasting with pronominalised adjectives which must take definite meanings -- compare *ħouto* 'a good thing / something good' vs *ħou'arh (qâħ)* 'the good thing' (lit. good \[it])

### Inflection Notes

- Fist person/Noun dual and plural endings (beginning in a nasal) combine with an adjective's final nasal or glottal stop to produce a nasal-stop cluster
  - ete' + -njex > etencex 'new (plural)'
  - ârrhâem + -ñënj > ârrhâeñqënj 'high (you & I)'
  - Note that this only occurs with adjective inflections, not with nasal suffixes generally
    - ete' + -njix > etennjix 'new thing (animate genitive)'
    - ârrhâem + -ñah > ârrhâemñah 'new thing (animate/human locative)'
- Second person endings (beginning in an R) combine with an adjective's final rhotic or glottal stop to produce a geminated rhotic
  - ete' + -rä' > eterrä' 'new (you)'
  - njarh + -räccex > njarräccex 'narrow (you\.pl)'

## Derivation

Adjectives can be derived in many regular ways from existing words.

### Comparison and Negation

Comparison and Negation are done through unstressed affixes that come before the word

|Meaning    |English           |Prefix      |Example A |IPA         |Example B  |IPA          |
|-----      |------------------|------------|----------|------------|-----------|-------------|
|Comparative|better / newer    | caf-       | cafħou   |/cæfˈħou̯/   | cafete'   |/cæˈfɛtɛʔ/   |
|Superlative|best / newest     | mef-       | mefħou   |/mɛfˈħou̯/   | mefete'   |/mɛˈfɛtɛʔ/   |
|Negative   |not good/new      | qui-       | quiħou   |/ɢuɪ̯ˈħou̯/   | quiete'   |/ɢuɪ̯ˈɛtɛʔ/   |
|Neg.Compar |less good/new     | mui-       | muiħou   |/muɪ̯ˈħou̯/   | muiete'   |/muɪ̯ˈɛtɛʔ/   |
|Neg.Super  |least good/new    | mea-       | meaħou   |/meɐ̯ˈħou̯/   | meaete'   |/meɐ̯ˈɛtɛʔ/   |

### Deriving Adjectives

There are a number of adjectives formed using Vuhîñkam sources of regular adjective derivation, but none of these are productive due to complex sound changes (though they tend to end in open-mid vowels).

New adjectives are commonly derived through prefixes which evolved from Vuhîñkam prepositions.

- *quttampa'* /ˈɢutˌtæm̥pæʔ/ 'rope' > *quttampâeo* /ˈɢuttæm̥ˌpɑe̯ɔ/ 'made of rope' through a Vuhîñkam suffix
- *źñärhä* /ˈʑɴar̥a/ 'metal' > irźñärhä /irˈʑɴar̥a/ 'metallic, forged from metal' through an Uħħuonanjh prefix
