# Sentence Structure

This section will go through methods of constructing proper sentences in Uhhuonanjh.

## Type

Word order in main clauses is (Topic)-Verb-Noun Phrases-Locative-Tag; adverbial noun phrases tend to come after verb arguments but this is not a strict rule.  Word order of these intervening elements is not strict as nouns are marked for case, though the first element tends to be the topic.  A minimal sentence consists of a Verb and a Tag, although while the Locative Pronoun is not required grammatically, it is almost always present, at least in the first sentence of a dialogue or communication.

Word order in dependent clauses is Noun Phrases-(Locative)-(Topic)-(Tag)-Verb; note that unlike the main clause, Tags and Locatives are optional and commonly dropped.

## Topic Prominence

Uhhuonanjh is a Topic-Prominent language, tending to place the sentence Topic directly before the verb.  Other noun phrases can appear in any order as long as they are between the Verb/Locative pronoun and the Sentence-final Tag of a main clause, or before the verb (and after a comma) of a dependent clause.

Topic prominence is also expressed through the conjugation of sentence-final tags, where arguments are usually placed topic-first.

|English                                |Uhhuonanjh                                   |
|---------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|
|I brought a pear home for you (formal) |ienjaś mu urumva camħencêrh tśarêrh qârh     |
|I brought a pear home for you (common) |ienjaś mu urumva camħencêrh tśarêrh qârhmoyêr|
|Me, I brought a pear home for you      |mvo ienjaś mu urumva camħencêrh tśarêrh qârhmoyêr|
|The pear I brought it home for you     |urumva ienjaś mu camħencêrh tśarêrh qârhyêrmo|
|Home, I brought the pear for you       |camħencêrh ienjaś mu urumva tśarêrh qârhyêrmo|
|For you, I brought the pear home       |tśarêrh ienjaś mu urumva camħencêrh qârhtśarhmo|

## Copular Constructions

The copula is expressed with the imperfective verb *qâeñ* (*qâe, jêño* participles).  When equating two noun phrases, both are used in the Nominative case.

The copula is not used as a separate verb for adjectives.  Instead, it is suffixed to the adjective (as *-qoñ*) to convert the adjective into a verb meaning 'to be X'.

## Conjunctions and Coordinate Clauses

Conjunctions such as *ħuom* 'and' can link sentences, coming between them with slight pauses before and after (expressed in writing with a comma before and after).

Conjunctions include:

- *ħuom* 'and' - used both as a conjunction and to link noun phrases
- *vorhâr* 'or' - used both as a conjunction and to link all kinds of phrases (noun, verb or descriptor)
- *rhu* 'if' - generally restricted to formal use as its function has largely been replaced by the Conditional Mood
- *verh* 'because'
- *fezzo* 'so, then'

Sentences can also simply link to each other with no conjunction in between, with the relationship determined either by the mood of each sentence (especially Conditional mood) or by the logic between the two sentences.

e.g. 'I sit and you eat', while it could be rendered as 'I sit, *huom*, you eat', would more commonly simply be rendered as 'I sit, you eat'.  Same for 'he saw us so he knows', which could more commonly be 'he saw us, he knows' rather than explicitly using the conjunction *fezzo*.

The usual alternative to using words like 'because', 'so', 'when', etc to form adverbial clauses, when the relationship between these sentences is necessary to explain, is to use a noun phrase instead - 'he saw us so he knows' becomes 'from him seeing us, he knows', with the noun phrase placed in topic position if required.  In cases where the phrase would be too long, or in cases where a full sentence is desired, they may be placed in separate main clauses, with the first clause referred to in the topic of the second using the pronoun *aoś* 'this' - 'he saw that we had arrived home, so he knows' becomes 'he saw that we had arrived home, from this, he knows.'

## Content Clauses

Content clauses are often linked to the sentence where they are referenced simply by placing them in sequence, in the same way as coordinate clauses above.  For example, 'he said "I want to go" when he saw me' becomes 'he said when he saw me, "I want to go"'.  There is no need to refer to the content clause in the main clause, although it can be done - most speech verbs allow the words expressed as an accusative verb argument.
