# Noun Phrases

This section will detail noun phrases.  In particular, it will take a look at the many uses of the different cases and go through postpositional constructions and their use in replacing adverbial clauses.

While the use of noun phrases as verb arguments and adverbials is often distinct, there is not a lot of strict differentiation between them.  It is common to place verb arguments before adverbials, but it is not grammatically required and it is also common to place an adverbial first when it's the topic.  Only verb arguments are usually allowed to take Tag person suffixes, which allows some differentiation.

## Verb Argument Use of Cases

Verbs aren't marked for transitivity or valency; each verb has a number of common arguments and all, or none, of these may be used at once with the sentence still being grammatically correct.  When an argument is omitted, it is either assumed to refer to an indefinite argument or a specific one if mentioned in context (including the context of the locative pronoun as well as pragmatic context).

When multiple arguments are present of the same case, it is simply assumed that they all take part in the action in the same role, e.g. 'Mary John run' == 'Mary and John run'.  A conjunction would only be used to join these noun phrases for emphasis.  The exception here is with the copula, where two or more Nominative arguments are equated - the common workaround is to place one side as a Topic, then use a plural pronoun to refer to all of them in the copular sentence itself, as in 'Mary John, they are doctors'.

- *verxanjh* 'to rain' - usually takes 0 arguments
  - *verxanjh mu qâ* - Is raining here
    - Standard usage, equivalent to 'It is raining (here)'
  - *verxanjh mu qâmoyêr* - I rain it here
    - Unusual usage, perhaps using 'rain' metaphorically, e.g. in the sense 'spread widely'
- *xea* 'to exist' - usually takes 1 argument (NOM)
  - *xeañ quo qâ* - exists somewhere
    - Unusual usage without context, equivalent to 'something exists somewhere'
    - Not unusual usage with context, equivalent to '(X,) it exists somewhere'
  - *xeañ mu qâ* - exists here
    - Common usage for when the thing that exists is known/obvious or irrelevant
    - Also common usage without context, where the locative 'mu' suggests a first person subject
  - *xeañ mu qâmo* - I exist here
    - Standard usage
  - *xeañ mu mvo muqqaśte urumvate qâ(ghâ)* - Me, a peach and a pear exist here
    - Standard usage
  - *xeañ mu qâmoyêr* - I exist it here
    - Unusual usage.  Use of additional ACC argument implies that 'it' has been changed/affected by my existence here.
- *ljêra'* 'to pull' - usually takes 2 arguments (NOM and ACC)
  - *ljêra' quo qâ* - pulls somewhere
    - Unusual usage, equiv. to 'pulling is happening somwhere'
  - *ljêra' mu qâ* - pulls here; *ljêra' mu qâmo* - I pull here
    - These two are usually equivalent outside of context
    - Common usage where the object is known/obvious or irrelevant
  - *ljêra' mu qâmoyêr* - I pull it here
    - Standard usage
  - *ljêra' mu yerêrh qâmo* - I pull to it here
    - Not unusual usage where the object is not considered to have changed/been affected by the action
      - e.g. 'I pulled the rock but it didn't budge', 'the rock' would be DAT instead of ACC to mark that it hasn't changed state/been affected
- *vaħħoñ* 'to say/tell' - takes up to 3-4 arguments (NOM, ACC/GEN, DAT)
  - *vaħħoñ quo qâ* - Someone somewhere talks
  - *vaħħoñ mu qâ(mo)* - (I) talk here
  - *vaħħoñ mu qâmoyêr* - I say it here
  - *vaħħoñ mu yerix qâmo* - I talk about it here
  - *vaħħoñ mu tśarêrh qâmoyêr* - I tell you it here
  - *vaħħoñ mu tśarêrh yerix qâmo* - I talk to you about it here
  - *vaħħoñ mu yêr tśarêrh yerix qâmo* - I say it to you about him/her here

## Adverbial Use of Cases

Nouns inflected in DAT/GEN/LOC cases are commonly used as simple adverbials.

Nouns in NOM or ACC case can be placed before the verb as a disjoint Topic (one that doesn't play any explicit role in the sentence other than to set the context).  It is common to place inanimate topics in ACC and all other topics in NOM, though this can be inverted to place an emphasis on the agency of an inanimate noun or the non-agency of others.

Adverbials can be suffixed with -qo/ñ/of to turn into a verb 'to be X', in the same way as adjectives, e.g. *ħuoñdvaśêra* 'in the forest' > *ħuoñdvaśêraqo* 'to be in the forest'.  (The use of this suffix for verb arguments is rarer and tends to be restricted to informal speech)

Some examples of simple adverbials:

- DAT
  - to / towards
  - for / for X's sake
  - onto/into/out to/over to/etc X
  - in order to X
  - until X / up to X / before X
  - similar to X
- GEN
  - of X / X's
  - from X / away from X / off X
  - against X
  - from X onwards / starting from X / after X
  - about X / regarding X
  - because of X
  - around X
- LOC
  - at/in/on X, on top of X
  - along with X / along X
  - INS (instrumental-specific uses)
    - with/by/using/through/via X
    - in the manner of X

### Possessives

While Genitive case is the most commonly used for possession, it's not the only way to express the relationship, and is usually only used when the possessor has is a greater or equal party in the relaionship.  When the possessor is commonly seen as a lesser party, it is common to use Dative instead.  If the relationship could be described better as Locative, then that is used.  The decision of which case to use is a purely semantic choice, all choices are equally correct grammatically.

- The person's dog - xaśonjëx fimtśanjh - person.GEN dog
- The dog's owner - fimtśancêrh ħakkeuöm - dog.DAT person
- the person's family - xaśonenj fesqampaonyex - person.DAT family
- the person's family (descendants) - xaśonjëx fesqampaonyex - person.GEN family
- The island's forest - üâeñaħ ħuoñdvaś - island.LOC forest

## Postpositional Phrases

Postpositions are a special type of noun, often used to form noun phrases analogous to English prepositional noun phrases.  They give more specific information of the relationship/direction/movement of nouns than cases.  While normal nouns can be used in a similar manner to form noun phrases, postpositions are unique in that they maintain a distinction between Locative case (LOC) ending in -ñah and Instrumentative (INS) case ending in -êra/-ôra.

When using postpositions, the original noun is inflected in a case to relate it to the postposition (commonly GEN), while the postposition is now considered the head of the phrase and inflected for the relationship to the clause as a whole (e.g. 'on top of the table' > table.GEN top.LOC).  The postposition can also be used as a normal noun, simply referring to some part, space or relation to the modified noun (e.g. *the inside* of the house, *the top/surface* of the table)

Common postpositions are listed in the following tables.  If not specified, the modified noun will be in GEN case.  Postpositions can generally take any relevant case, not just the ones listed. As an example, *fśeaz* 'front of' can be used in any case - NOM (the front of the box is yellow), ACC (they hit the front of the box), DAT (they walk in front of me \[and stays there]), GEN (they walk from in front of me), LOC (they are in front of me) and INS (they pass by in front of me \[and are no longer there]).

Note that postpositions commonly abbreviate Dative case endings to -njêrh (with the nasal assimilating stem-final nasals) - this is common informally for many inanimate words, but also common in normal language in postpositions.

### Location and Direction

|Word         |Case|Meaning        |Example                    |Example Meaning                 |
|-------------|----|---------------|---------------------------|--------------------------------|
|fśeaz        | LOC| in front of   | fix fśeazñaħ arrhanjh     |to stand in front of me         |
|fśeaz        | INS| via front of  | fix fśeazêra xarrhenj     |to pass by in front of me       |
|ljix         | LOC| behind        | tfaśśaix ljixñaħ arrhanjh |to stand behind the tree        |
|ljix         | INS| behind        | tfaśśaix ljixêra xarrhenj |to pass behind the tree         |
|pon          | DAT| next to       | pëx pononôrh gheanjh      |to sit down next to us          |
|pon          | LOC|next to/beside | pëx ponñaħ gheanjh        |to be sitting next to us        |
|pon          | INS| beside        | pëx ponôra xarrhenj       |to pass beside us               |
|DAT + vaś    | DAT| above         | munôrh vaśnjêrh jêñgha'   |to look above this place/here   |
|DAT + vaś    | LOC| above         | munôrh vaśñaħ qurhiħa     |to float above here             |
|xacca        | LOC| above         | muëx xaccañaħ qurhiħa     |to float above here             |
|xacca        | INS| over          | arrhacca'ix xaccaêra      |over the mountain               |
|qunjh        | GEN|from on top of | erreqqaix qunjëx ioña'    |to take from on top of the rock |
|qunjh        | LOC| on/on top of  | erreqqaix qunjñaħ quttunjh|to put on top of the rock       |
|DAT + mekke  | LOC| underneath    | fix feñxanjêrh mekkeñah   |underneath my foot              |
|DAT + mekke  | DAT|below/beneath  | fix feñxanjêrh mekkenjêrh |below/under my food             |
|ghêamh       | LOC|hanging from   |tfaśśaix ghêamñaħ arrêamh|the leaf hanging from the tree  |
|ghêamh       | GEN|off of/off from|tfaśśaix ghêamix vônluum   |to break off of the tree        |
|LOC + qâu    | LOC|near           |tfaśśaêra qâuñaħqo         |to be near the tree             |
|riem         | LOC|far from       |tfaśśaix riemñaħqo         |to be far from the tree         |
|âur          | LOC|right of       |tfaśśaix âurñaħqo          |to be on the right of the tree  |
|ħeim         | LOC|left of        |tfaśśaix ħeimñaħqo         |to be on the left of the tree   |
|ħaie         | INS|along          |kixeźix ħaieêra arrhaonj   |to walk along the beach         |
|puoñh        | INS|across         |quieźanjix puoñôra arrhaonj|to walk across the river        |
|moa'         | LOC|opposite/across|quieźanjix moaññaħ         |on the other side of the river  |
|moa'        | INS|opposite/against|fix moa'êra qunljar        |to fight against me             |
|LOC + quonj  | DAT|into/in/inside |aħakêra quonnjêrh uirâ     |to go into the house            |
|LOC + quonj  | LOC|in/inside      |aħakêra quonjñaħqo         |to be inside the house          |
|LOC + vaoñ   | GEN|out of/from    |aħakêra vaonnjêrh uirâ     |to go out of the house          |
|LOC + vaoñ   | LOC|out/outisde    |aħakêra vaoññaħqo          |to be outside the house         |
|ñieñ         | INS|through        |yeħħonjix ñieñêra arrhanjh |to travel through the territory |
|ñieñ     | LOC|through/during|yeħħonjix ñieññaħ jêñghakkeu|to be seen throughout the territory|
|ñêr          | GEN|around/about   |zuiëx ñêrix xaśonj         |about seven people              |
|ñêr| LOC|around/surrounding |qu'njonjëx ñêrñaħ ħuoñdvaś |the forest surrounding the settlement|

- vaś and xacca are synonymous, deriving from 'sky' and 'mountain' respectively.  Some communities favour one or the other, others use both equally.
- while 'above' and 'on top of' have separate postpositions, the opposite 'below' and 'right underneath / on the bottom of' share the same word.  'Mekkenjêrh' can have locative meanings (we sit below/under/beneath the stars), despite itself being in dative case.  'Mekkeñah' can similarly have dative meanings (we attach it to the bottom of the box).

### Context and Logical Relations

|Word         |Case|Meaning        |Example                    |Example Meaning                 |
|-------------|----|---------------|---------------------------|--------------------------------|
|qâu          | LOC|about/regarding| fix qâuñaħ yeañix arrhaiix|his attitude regarding me       |
|yêrh         | NOM|result/intention of| aoś arrhaiix yêrh     |(intended) result of this attitude|
|yêrh         | INS|as a result of | ħanjmanjix yêrhêra        |because of the fire             |
|itfe         | NOM|cause/reason for| ħanjmanjix itfe          |cause/reason for the fire       |
|itfe         | DAT|as a cause of  | ħanjmanjix itfenjêrh      |leading to the fire             |
|itfe         | GEN|because of     | ħanjmanjix itfeix         |because of the fire             |

### Note on translating adverbial clauses

Adverbial clauses do not occur in the language, instead they tend to be replaced by relative clauses or noun phrases (often headed by a postposition).

- X when Y > X during Y.noun
  - I saw the king when I got home
    - 'I saw the king at arriving home'
    - see DST king.DAT, home-DAT arriving-LOC, IND.PAST-1s.NOM
    - jêñghaf minj vakkênênj, camħencêrh xaśanjêra, qârhmoyênj
  - I saw the king after I got home
    - 'I saw the king at **end of** arriving home'
    - see DST king.ACC, my home-DAT arriving-GEN **end-LOC**, IND.PAST-1s.NOM
    - jêñghaf minj vakkênênj, camħencêrh xaśanjix **färhñaħ**, qârhmoyênj
- X, because Y / X, for Y > X with cause Y.noun
  - You can't stay, because she is tired
    - 'You can't stay, from cause of her being tired'
      - stay PRX.NEG her being.tired-GEN cause-GEN PRH-2s.VOC
    - You can't stay because that: she is tired
      - stay PRX.NEG that-GEN cause-GEN PRH-2s.VOC: be.tired IND-2s.NOM

*TODO: add more examples of these?  or maybe leave them to semantics?*
