# Verb Phrases

This section will detail verb phrases.  In particular, it will give a short summary on independnent clause verb phrases (this topic is mostly covered already in the Verb/Tag morphology sections), then it will go into detail regarding verb-headed relative clauses.

## Summary of Verb Syntax so far

Each verb has 4 roots, PART, PART.NEG, PERF and IMPF; these roots are invariant (except for deriving new words).  Verbs are often accompanied by a Locative Pronoun, which also provides the verb with negative and emphatic markers.  Verbs always come first in a sentence / main clause.

In order to be able to use a verb in a sentence, it requires a sentence-final Tag.  This Tag conjugates for Mood, Tense, Aspect (within the bounds of the verb's Perfective or Imperfective aspect) and Person.

Multiple tags can be used in a single sentence, combining the meanings of all used tags (though in practice the number of tags used rarely exceeds 2, almost never above 3)

## Serial verb constructions

Multiple verbs can be chained wherever they are used.  The resulting meaning is either that of 'X and Y' or 'X then/to/until Y', although this is determined pragmatically and not grammatically.  Each verb can take its own locative pronoun or one locative pronoun located after the final verb can apply to all verbs in the chain.  Verbs don't have to agree on PERF/IMPF, and if they disagree then only the final one is taken into account when applying aspects.

For the second meaning 'X until Y', it is common to use an adjective + verb ending -qoñ.

|Uhhuonanjh|Gloss|English|
|----------|-----|-------|
|Mâenjârâ mu quljârâ vâe qanjqonj|come.PERF PRX go.PERF MED IND-HAB-3Hs.NOM|S/he (sometimes) comes (here) and goes (there)|
|Qompuo quttśee mu qâghâ|eat.IMPF drink.IMPF PRX IND-1p.NOM|We are eating and drinking|
|Mâenjârâ qompëñ mu śancu'!|come.PERF eat.PERF mu IMP.POL-2s.NOM|(You,) come (here) and eat here!|
|Varħanjef qompëñ minj qanjqonj|hunt.PERF eat.PERF DST IND-HAB-3Hs.NOM|S/he hunts and eats OR S/he hunts to eat|
|Vâeoñqof paomvaqoñ mu qârfê|shock.PERF white-be.IMPF PRX IND.PAST-1s.ACC|I was shocked (until I was) pale/white in the face|
|Qompëñ vifqoñ minj qârhqonj|eat.PERF full-be.IMPF DST IND.PAST-3s.NOM|He ate until he was full|

## Participles and Relative Clauses

Verb participles have two primary functions: they can either act as an Inanimate noun (representing the action), inflecting for case and taking a place in the sentence as a noun phrase, or they can act as an adjective (attributive - modifying nouns, predicative - X is adj or nominalised - those who are X).  In both cases, the participle can also act as the head of its own relative clause, taking its own noun phrases.

Note that a participle used as an Inanimate noun representing the action does *not* require the Nominative -te/-to ending.  A nominalised participle still requires it.

### Bare participle use examples

Some examples of participle use.  Anywhere that a participle can be used, a relative clause can be used as well.

- *gheanjh* 'sitting / to sit'
  - *arralnjin mu gheanjenjêrh qâ* 'I love sitting' (noun)
  - *gheanjenj ko'amponj* 'the sitting man / the man who is sitting' (attributive adjective)
- *qunljar* 'fighting / to fight'
  - *jêñghanjef minj qunljarix qâmo* 'I look away from the fighting' (noun)
  - *qunljarñênj ghomoñqaħ* 'with/at/by the fighting women' (attributive adjective)
  - *qunljarrä' u'* 'you, who is fighting' (attributive adjective on pronoun)
  - *qunljarte* 'fighting thing' (adjective nominalised as Inanimate.Nominative)
  - *qunljarqoñ* 'to be fighting' (predicative adjective)

### Relative clause construction

Relative clauses word order is simply Verb-final, with free word order otherwise.  When used in a sentence, relative clauses are usually surrounded by pauses (commas in romanisation) in order to separate the main clause arguments from the relative clause ones.

In relative clauses, the participle acts as a verb and thus allows nouns to take nominative and accusative cases as required.  If the participle modifies a noun, then that noun is considered to be the subject of the verb unless otherwise specified.

Relative clauses may contain a Tag, placed in directly *before* the verb in this case, but the tag is not mandatory.  The locative pronoun is similarly not necessary unless required for negation or emphasis.

- me'ekkeñaħ gheanjh
  - `ground-LOC sit.PART`
  - sitting on the ground
- arralnjin quo, me'ekkeñaħ gheanjenjêrh, qâmo
  - `love.IMPF INDEF.LOC, ground-LOC sit.PART, IND-1s.NOM`
  - I love sitting on the ground
- tśarh vônlunjh
  - `2s.ACC hit.PART`
  - hitting you
- jêñghaanjh vâe, tśarh vônlunjenjêrh, qâmo
  - `see.IMPF DIST, 2s.ACC hit.PART, IND-1s.NOM`
  - I see you getting hit / I see that you get hit
- tśarh vônlunjh xaśonj
  - `2s.ACC hit.PART person`
  - the person (who is) hitting you OR the person who hit you
- mvo qaoi'ħêmh xaśonj
  - `1s.NOM fear.PART person`
  - the person who I fear
- qârmo qaoi'ħêmh xaśonj
  - `IND.PAST-1s.NOM fear.PART person`
  - the person who I feared/used to fear
- tśimpü qâr qaoi'ħêmh xaśonj
  - `NEG.PRX IND.PAST fear.PART person`
  - the person who didn't fear me
- huomënj vâurtśarh yêräncox xaśonj
  - `EMPH.DST COM-2s.ACC help.PART-pl person`
  - the people who will definitely help you
- huomënj vâurtśarh yêränyex
  - `EMPH.DST COM-2s.ACC help.PART-H.pl`
  - those/the ones who will definitely help you
- qâuganjh mu, huomënj vâurtśarh yêränyex, qâmo
  - `know.IMPF PRX, EMPH.DST COM-2s.ACC help.PART-H.pl, IND-1s.NOM`
  - I know the ones who will definitely help you
- ħouqoñ quo, tśarh yêrämh, qâ
  - `good-be.IMPF INDEF.LOC, 2s.ACC help.PART, IND`
  - Helping you is good
- tśarh yêrämh ħouqoñ
  - `2s.ACC help.PART good-be.PART`
  - Helping you being good / (the fact) that helping you is good
- qâuganjh mu, tśarh yêrämh ħouqoñ, qâmo
  - `know.IMPF PRX, 2s.ACC help.PART good-be.PART, IND-1s.NOM`
  - I know that helping you is good
